Release/1.55 post (#229)
conan-io/conan-io.github.io: _posts/2022-12-19-New-conan-release-1-55.markdown

---
layout: post
comments: false
title: "Conan 1.55: CMakeDeps can now customize its dependencies target names, files and types, new tools.build:compiler_executables conf, new NMakeDeps and NMakeToolchain integration, env-vars and conf enabled for editables"
meta_title: "Version 1.55 of Conan C++ Package Manager is Released" 
meta_description: "The new version features includes CMakeDeps can now customize its dependencies target names, files and types, new tools.build:compiler_executables conf and much more..."
---

We are pleased to announce that [Conan 1.55 is
out](https://github.com/conan-io/conan/releases/tag/1.55.0) and comes with some
significant new features and bug fixes. First, CMakeDeps provides the ability to set the

> properties on the consumer side. Also, we added the new *tools.build:compiler_executables*

Reviewer: Lower is code highlighted

```suggestion
properties on the consumer side. Also, we added the new `tools.build:compiler_executables`
```

Reviewer: I was going to suggest adding a link but it's not listed on https://docs.conan.io/en/latest/reference/config_files/global_conf.html?highlight=compiler_executables#tools-configurations

> configuration to define the compiler's executable location in CMakeToolchain,
> MesonToolchain, and AutoToolsToolchain. We improved integration with

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
configuration to define the compiler's executable location in ``CMakeToolchain``,
``MesonToolchain``, and ``AutotoolsToolchain``. We improved integration with
```

[NMAKE](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/cpp/build/reference/nmake-reference) using the
[NMakeDeps](https://docs.conan.io/en/latest/reference/conanfile/tools/microsoft.html#nmakedeps)
and
[NMakeToolchain](https://docs.conan.io/en/latest/reference/conanfile/tools/microsoft.html#nmaketoolchain)
generators. Finally, we enabled environment vars and configuration for use in editable
packages.

## CMakeDeps can now customize its properties

As you may know, Conan introduced the properties model a couple of releases ago to add a
generic way of passing certain information to generators. Conan uses this model for the
[new generators](https://docs.conan.io/en/latest/reference/conanfile/tools.html),
replacing the legacy `cpp_info` attributes like `cpp_info.names` and `cpp_info.filenames`
(you can check the migration guide from the legacy model
[here](https://docs.conan.io/en/latest/migrating_to_2.0/properties.html)). Before 1.55, it
was impossible to override the values set by the dependencies. For example, if a recipe
sets the `cmake_find_mode` to `both`, Conan would generate both config and module files

> for every consumer of the recipe. This behaviour could be inconvenient for the consumers
> for some cases.

Reviewer: I think this needs a clear example - but I could not make one short enough 🙊 

Just maybe drop the sentence?

```suggestion
for every consumer of the recipe.
```

Starting in 1.55, Conan enables overwritting from the consumer side the following
properties for CMakeDeps: `cmake_file_name`, `cmake_target_name`, `cmake_find_mode`,
`cmake_module_file_name` and `cmake_module_target_name`. Let's see an example of a recipe
that has
[zlib](https://github.com/conan-io/conan-center-index/blob/master/recipes/zlib/all/conanfile.py)
as a dependency.

If you check, for example, the zlib recipe in Conan Center, it defines several properties

> for CMakeDeps in the `package_info()` method:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
for ``CMakeDeps`` in the `package_info()` method:
```

Reviewer: There's a handful of these if you want to add code formatting 🙊

```python
...

def package_info(self):
    self.cpp_info.set_property("cmake_find_mode", "both")
    self.cpp_info.set_property("cmake_file_name", "ZLIB")
    self.cpp_info.set_property("cmake_target_name", "ZLIB::ZLIB")
...

```

Imagine you have an application that consumes zlib, and you want to change these
properties because you want to generate only *config files* and also you are using a
different target name for zlib in your CMakeLists.txt. Then you could use
`CMakeDeps.set_property` in the `generate()` method to override the values set in the zlib
recipe:

```python
from conan.tools.cmake import CMakeDeps

...

class ConsumerRecipe(ConanFile):

    ...

>     def generate(self):
>         deps = CMakeDeps(self)
>         # We want to use zlib target name instead of ZLIB::ZLIB
>         deps.set_property("zlib", "cmake_target_name", "zlib")
>         # We invalidate whatever value the zlib recipe sets and fallback to
>         # the default for Conan
>         deps.set_property("zlib", "cmake_find_mode", None)

Reviewer: Is this supposed to implement the situation described above? I would have expected the code to be more like

```suggestion
    def generate(self):
        deps = CMakeDeps(self)
        # Only generate the "config" mode
        deps.set_property("zlib", "cmake_find_mode", "config")
        # We want to use `zlib` as the target name instead of ZLIB::ZLIB
        deps.set_property("zlib", "cmake_target_name", "zlib")
```

🤔 Maybe my expectations do not match the feature?

Author: I wanted to give an example of the use of `None` as argument and how to invalidate the values in the upstream recipe and fallback to the Conan default value in this case as `config` is the Conan default this: `deps.set_property("zlib", "cmake_find_mode", None)` is equivalent to `deps.set_property("zlib", "cmake_find_mode", "config")` maybe I can explain a bit more in detail

    ...
```

You can read more about the CMakeDeps set_property method in the [Conan
documentation](https://docs.conan.io/en/latest/reference/conanfile/tools/cmake/cmakedeps.html#set-property).

## New tools.build:compiler_executables conf

We added the ``tools.build:compiler_executables`` configuration to set the location to the
compiler executables. This configuration defines a dictionary, with the language as the
key and the executable location as the value. For example, you could use this in a Conan
profile:

> ```txt
> [settings]
> os=Macos
> arch=x86_64
> ...
> [conf]
> tools.build:compiler_executables={"cpp": "path_to_my_c++_compiler", "c": "path_to_my_c_compiler"}
> 
> ```

Reviewer: I had tweaked the styling to get syntax highlights for profiles under the INI format 🤔 

I also like to make example "copy paste" the tree dots would cause it to fail AFAIK

```suggestion
```ini
[settings]
os=Macos
arch=x86_64

[conf]
tools.build:compiler_executables={"cpp": "path_to_my_c++_compiler", "c": "path_to_my_c_compiler"}
```
```

the recipe sets in the `package_info()` method while developing. This can happen, for
example, in a package like this in editable mode:

```python

import os
from conan import ConanFile

class ConanPackage(ConanFile):

    ...

    def package_info(self):
        # This is BROKEN if we put this package in editable mode
        self.runenv_info.define_path("MYDATA_PATH", 
                                     os.path.join(self.package_folder, "my/data/path"))
```

This breaks if we are in editable mode as there's no package yet. For these cases we can
define it in the ``layout()`` method, in the same way the ``cpp_info`` can be defined
there. The ``layouts`` object contains ``source``, ``build`` and ``package`` scopes, and
each one contains one instance of ``buildenv_info``, ``runenv_info`` and ``conf_info``:

```python
from conan import ConanFile

class SayConan(ConanFile):
    ...
    def layout(self):
        # The final path will be relative to the self.source_folder
        self.layouts.source.buildenv_info.define_path("MYDATA_PATH", "my/source/data/path")
        # The final path will be relative to the self.build_folder

>         self.layouts.build.buildenv_info.define_path("MYDATA_PATH2", "my/build/data/path")

Reviewer: Do these's all need to be different?

Could my `source()` and `build()` use the same ENV vars?
